# This Week in Enhancements - 2020-08-28

Hello, everyone!

This is the first weekly edition of a new experiment. We want to highlight the
great work happening in the OpenShift enhancements repository in a newsletter
format.  We hope to encourage participation in enhancement discussions, but
also to help more people get a feel for new things happening in areas you may
not normally pay attention to.

And now, to the first edition …

## Merged Enhancements

<PR ID>: (reviews this week / total reviews) summary

3 Enhancements have merged in the last week.

[104](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/104): (1/11) add tech preview guidelines 

This is an older pull request from Ben Parees that starts to capture things
engineers need to know when implementing a feature that is Tech Preview.  It
was resurrected and merged this week.  Ongoing feedback is encouraged via
follow-up pull requests.

[405](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/405): (0/41) Add an enhancement for adding a VRF CNI 

“To allow isolation, and make it possible to have overlaps between the CIDRs of
secondary networks (and between them and the pod's address space), we want to
introduce a VRF meta cni plugin. Taking advantage of the chaining mechanism, it
can be used to assign a secondary interface to a custom VRF.”

[451](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/451): (1/1) default-ingress-cert-configmap: implemented 

This was more of a housekeeping update.  Take this as a reminder to think about
enhancements written over the last year.  Do any need to be updated to reflect
the current state?  Should the enhancement status be updated to “implemented”?
Did the design details change throughout implementation and code review?

## New Enhancements

10 new enhancements were posted this week.

[449](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/449): (0/0) Add Tunable Router Buffer Sizes EP 

[450](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/450): (3/3) Adds Contour Operator Enhancement Proposal 

[452](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/452): (3/3) Add egress router EP 

[453](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/453): (22/22) WIP: network: Add a high level BGP use cases overview 

[454](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/454): (44/44) Enhancement for User Space Pod Interface and API Library 

This enhancement received the highest number of reviews in the last week!

[455](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/455): (7/7) network: add port registry 

[456](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/456): (1/1) Adds ExternalDNS Operator Enhancement Proposal 

[457](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/457): (2/2) Enhancement: Select logs By pod label 

[458](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/458): (0/0) Whereabouts IPAM CNI Sticky IP Addresses Enhancement 

[459](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/459): (22/22) installer: early write up for SLB managed API lbs 

## Other Highlights

In addition to listing merged and newly posted pull requests, we would like to
highlight a few enhancements with a bit more commentary.


[436](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/436): enhancement proposal for Packet IPI

OpenShift has grown to include IPI support for multiple platforms.  What’s
really interesting about this proposal is that it comes from the Packet.net
team directly.  They wrote this enhancement proposal as well as the first PR
against the installer and intend to do all of the work necessary to complete
IPI support for their platform.  It is exciting to see this level of engagement
from a provider!

[450](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/450): Adds Contour Operator Enhancement Proposal

A proposal to add an operator for the Contour Project is interesting on its
own.  It also includes a really good open question: should the team focus on
building a community operator first that is then used as the basis for the
OpenShift specific operator?  This practice is not nearly as common as you
might hope.  The Network Edge team has struggled to find any examples beyond
the monitoring operator.  Do you have ideas for how best to approach this?
Weigh in on the enhancement with your thoughts!

[423](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/423): Implement OpenStack Cloud Controller Manager support

We need to move from the in-tree OpenStack cloud provider to an external
implementation of the OpenStack cloud controller manager.  This is the first
platform where we’re moving to an out-of-tree cloud provider, so in addition to
the OpenStack support, it raises questions about how we handle out-of-tree
providers in general.  This enhancement includes a proposal to implement that
general support.  It’s great that the OpenStack team is stepping up to
implement this, but an open question on the enhancement asks who should own
this longer term.


That’s all for this week.  Feedback welcome!

-- 
Russell Bryant
Doug Hellmann
