---
title: assisted-installer-bare-metal-validations
authors:
  - "@dhellmann"
  - "@stbenjam"
reviewers:
  - "@romfreiman"
  - "@yevgeny-shnaidman"
approvers:
  - "@hardys"
  - "@crawford"
  - "@markmc"
creation-date: 2020-06-24
last-updated: 2020-06-26
status: implementable
---

# Assisted Installer Bare Metal Validations

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [x] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Summary

The assisted installer supports a user-provisioned infrastructure
installation workflow for bare-metal clusters, but configures the
installed cluster with certain capabilities that are currently only
available using the `baremetal` platform in an installer-provisioned
infrastructure workflow.

This enhancement describes how we can modify the installer to allow
bare-metal user-provisioned infrastructure clusters, including those
produced with the assisted installer, to include those
installer-provisioned infrastructure capabilities.

## Motivation

The [connected-assisted-installer
enhancement](./connected-assisted-installer.md) describes how an agent
running on several bare-metal hosts receive a command from the
assisted installer application to begin the installation of that
host. One of the first tasks that each host performs upon receiving
this instruction is to download, from the assisted installer, the
appropriate Ignition file for that host's role. These ignition files
are generated by the assisted installer earlier in the process using
the `openshift-install create ignition-configs` command.

This installer workflow mirrors the [bare-metal user-provisioned
infrastructure
workflow](https://github.com/openshift/installer/blob/master/docs/user/metal/install_upi.md)
in that the the OpenShift installer is used to generate assets for the
cluster but the `openshift-install create cluster` command is not used
to manage the deployment. However, the assisted installer does need to
enable some `baremetal` installer-provisioned infrastructure platform
features on the installed cluster. Therefore, we need to consider how
to make those features available while using a user-provisioned
infrastructure workflow. Currently, the assisted installer is using
the [workaround of providing dummy
data](https://github.com/filanov/bm-inventory/blob/54d56712b59d306125ee68d2014c98cf1e995e75/internal/installcfg/installcfg.go#L143-L190)
for fields that are currently required by the `baremetal` platform but
that are unused in this use-case.

### Goals

- Allow the use of certain installer-provisioned infrastructure
  features on bare-metal user-provisioned infrastructure clusters
- Avoid making any incompatible changes to the bare-metal
  installer-provisioned infrastructure workflow

### Non-Goals

- Removing or relaxing any validation rules for the
  installer-provisioned infrastructure installer.
- Recapitulate the test plans for the assisted installer.
- Recapitulate the [approach for making parts of the bare metal
  infrastructure automation optional](./baremetal-provisioning-optional.md).

## Proposal

The [`baremetal.Platform` fields in
`install-config.yaml`](https://github.com/openshift/installer/blob/master/docs/user/metal/install_ipi.md#install-config)
can be considered to be configuring three distinct capabilities:

1. Provision a libvirt VM with the bootstrap configuration, and use
   IPMI/PXE to provision a set of hosts as control plane nodes.
2. Configure the `baremetal-operator` to run on the installed cluster
   for day 2 machine-management operations such as power control and
   automated provisioning of additional workers.
3. Configure [cluster-hosted control-plane
   load-balancing](https://github.com/openshift/installer/blob/master/docs/design/baremetal/networking-infrastructure.md)
   using `keepalived` and `haproxy`.

The proposal is to move where some of the the input validation happens
to allow the latter 2 capabilities to be configured for
user-provisioned infrastructure, without requiring configuration that
is only relevant to the first capability.

### User Stories

#### Story 1

As a developer building the assisted installer tools, I want to be
able to run the OpenShift installer to generate assets for a bare
metal cluster without invoking validations that only apply to the
installer-provisioned infrastructure workflows so I can use the assets
in user-provisioned workflows.

#### Story 2

As a developer of the OpenShift installer, I want to be able to add
validation rules for bare metal clusters correctly based on whether
the cluster is being built using the installer-provisioned
infrastructure workflow or the user-provisioned workflow so I can
apply only the rules necessary for each case.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

All of the validation is currently performed during early phases of
the installer for the `InstallConfig` target. The user-provisioned
workflow used by the assisted installer does not run the phase for the
`Cluster` target (it only ever runs up to the `IgnitionConfigs`
target), so if we move some of the validation into the later phase we
will have a better separation of the parts needed to build the assets
for the user-provisioned workflow and the assisted installer from the
parts needed to run the installer for installer-provisioned
infrastructure for bare metal. A secondary benefit is that the
validation for the `baremetal` platform will more closely match the
validation for cloud platforms.

The install config inputs are currently validated as part of
generating the `InstallConfig` asset in
[InstallConfig.finish()](https://github.com/openshift/installer/blob/master/pkg/asset/installconfig/installconfig.go#L141),
which invokes some logic that applies to all platforms in
[ValidateInstallConfig()](https://github.com/openshift/installer/blob/master/pkg/types/validation/installconfig.go#L40)
before running the platform-specific logic from
[validatePlatform()](https://github.com/openshift/installer/blob/master/pkg/types/validation/installconfig.go#L341). For
the `baremetal` platform that results in calling
[ValidatePlatform()](https://github.com/openshift/installer/blob/master/pkg/types/baremetal/validation/platform.go#L218).

The
[PlatformProvisionCheck](https://github.com/openshift/installer/blob/master/pkg/asset/installconfig/platformprovisioncheck.go)
and
[PlatformCredsCheck](https://github.com/openshift/installer/blob/master/pkg/asset/installconfig/platformcredscheck.go)
assets are both dependencies for the `Cluster` asset, which means they
are evaluated later in the installation process. Both already have
platform-specific logic, although not for the `baremetal` platform.

The assisted installer does not need the `bootstrapProvisioningIP`,
`provisioningNetworkCIDR`, `provisioningDHCPRange`, or
`provisioningNetworkInterface` fields. The values in those fields are
used to configure the provisioning tools used for the
installer-provisioned infrastructure workflow, so those validation
checks could move to a new function in the
`pkg/types/baremetal/validation` package that can be invoked from
[PlatformProvisionCheck.Generate()](https://github.com/openshift/installer/blob/master/pkg/asset/installconfig/platformprovisioncheck.go#L37).

There are two validation rules for the `clusterOSImage` and
`bootstrapOSImage` fields, to ensure the value is a valid URL and to
ensure the URL exists. Those checks can be split between the two
phases, so that the URL format validation is done in
`ValidateInstallConfig()` and the existence check is moved to
`PlatformProvisionCheck`.

The assisted installer does not need the `libvirtURI` or host BMC
credentials, so the checks for those values could move to a new public
function in the `pkg/types/baremetal/validation` package that can be
invoked from
[PlatformCredsCheck.Generate()](https://github.com/openshift/installer/blob/master/pkg/asset/installconfig/platformcredscheck.go#L60).

Changing the BMC credential validation in the installer is only part
of the work required to make `BareMetalHost` resources work without
credentials. The `baremetal-operator` also [needs to be
updated](https://github.com/metal3-io/baremetal-operator/pull/563) to
not treat the missing credentials as an error.

### Risks and Mitigations

Moving some of the validation steps means that invalid data will be
caught later in the process. Most users will run the `create cluster`
command directly, so they will not see a significant change. When the
installer runs under Hive, or if the user runs the phases individually
so they can inject extra manifests, the `create cluster` step may
happen much later in the process. Bad data will still be caught before
the bootstrap VM is launched, though, so it should be relatively quick
in the overall installation process.

There are no security implications for this change.

## Design Details

### Test Plan

Besides the existing and new unit tests, the existing e2e tests for
the `baremetal` platform will continue to test the full set of
validation rules. The test suite for the assisted installer will
verify that no extra validation rules are applied.

### Graduation Criteria

**Note:** *Section not required until targeted at a release.*

Define graduation milestones.

These may be defined in terms of API maturity, or as something else. Initial proposal
should keep this high-level with a focus on what signals will be looked at to
determine graduation.

Consider the following in developing the graduation criteria for this
enhancement:
- Maturity levels - `Dev Preview`, `Tech Preview`, `GA`
- Deprecation

Clearly define what graduation means.

#### Examples

These are generalized examples to consider, in addition to the aforementioned
[maturity levels][maturity-levels].

##### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

- Ability to utilize the enhancement end to end
- End user documentation, relative API stability
- Sufficient test coverage
- Gather feedback from users rather than just developers

##### Tech Preview -> GA 

- More testing (upgrade, downgrade, scale)
- Sufficient time for feedback
- Available by default

**For non-optional features moving to GA, the graduation criteria must include
end to end tests.**

## Implementation History

Major milestones in the life cycle of a proposal should be tracked in `Implementation
History`.

## Alternatives

### Add a new platform

We could add a new platform to the installer to provide a clear home
for all of the logic that is specific to the assisted installer. This
would be a more invasive change, and might end up being confusing
since the installer would either still need to configure the cluster
with the `baremetal` platform or the `machine-api-operator` would need
to understand a new platform and configure the correct machine API
implementation.

### Add flag(s) to install-config.yml

We could add a flag or other input field to `install-config.yml` to
control the validation behavior. For example,
<https://github.com/openshift/installer/pull/3794> proposes a list of
validation rules to skip. There are two reasons not to do this. First,
it would expose the validation rules through the installer's public
API, even though we would only want the assisted installer to use the
feature. Second, it places the burden of managing the set of
validations on the wrapper in the assisted installer, instead of on
the author of validation rules in the installer source code. We know
which validations should apply in each case, so there is no need to
make the validations configurable.

### Add an environment variable

An environment variable is a hidden API control for the installer,
which makes using it and debugging its use more difficult. It also
implies that there may be checks for the variable in several places in
the code where the existing validation rules are, which spreads the
knowledge of which validation rules apply in different scenarios
throughout the installer code base, instead of using the existing
dependency structure to manage them.
